
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# apatfa

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/toddagood/apatfa/workflows/R-CMD-check/badge.svg)](https://github.com/toddagood/apatfa/actions)
<!-- badges: end -->

The `apatfa` package generates a Word (docx) file containing APA Tables,
Figures, and Appendix sections.

## Installation

You can install the development version of apatfa from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
devtools::install_github("toddagood/apatfa")
```

## Example

Please see `paper.R` and `paper.docx` in `apatfa/inst/iris/`.

## Details

The `apatfa` (a-pat-fa) package automates the creation of “Tables”,
“Figures”, and “Appendix” sections for scholarly papers written in MS
Word using the APA style guide. The name `apatfa` is an abbreviation for
American Psychological Association Tables, Figures, and Appendices.
According to APA style, tables and figures can either be placed within
the body of the paper or they can be grouped into end sections. The
`apatfa` package takes the approach of always putting tables and figures
in end sections (along with the appendices) in order to keep a clear
separation between input and output documents in the document workflow.
Your manually entered body content is kept in an input docx file and the
content generated by R is kept in a separate output docx file. The
output docx file is then included (by reference, with auto-refresh) back
into the input docx file by using the `IncludeText` feature of Word.

The main function `apa_docx()` generates an output docx file containing
bookmarked content (tables, figures, and appendices) numbered and
organized in APA style sections. Within each output section, the content
is ordered by the first bookmark reference to the content from within
the input docx file. After the output file is included into the end of
the input file using a Word `IncludeText` field, the bookmarked content
in the output docx file will be available for reference from within the
input docx file in the usual way (by using the
`Word > Insert > Cross Reference > Bookmark` menu).

This package primarily uses the `officer` and `flextable` packages, but
the difference here is the obsession with conforming to the APA style
guide. For example, in APA style, numeric table columns should be
center-aligned and at the same time should be decimal-aligned, which
flextables do not support, while `apatfa` supports that and does it by
default.

The `apatfa` package uses the `officer` package to read and write docx
files, uses the `flextable` package to style tables, and uses the
`ggplot2` package to style figures. I really appreciate the work of
David Gohel and the other contributors to the `officer` and `flextable`
packages.

Here are the basic steps for using `apatfa` to create a paper:

-   To get started, download (usually from your company or institution)
    a Word (docx) file containing a title page template, headers,
    footers, and pre-defined APA styles for paragraphs and fonts.

-   Use `Word > Insert > Quick Parts > Field` to insert an
    `{IncludeText "output_file.docx"}` field right after the
    ‘References’ section in your paper. Note that `apatfa` does not
    attempt to automate generation of the ‘References’ section because
    there are several good reference management tools available that
    integrate directly into the `Word > References` menu.

-   Install and load the `apatfa` package in R:

``` r
install.packages("devtools")
install_github("toddagood/apatfa")
library(apatfa)
```

-   Ensure that Arial, Courier New, and Times New Roman fonts are
    installed on your computer (such as in the Windows font registry),
    that the `extrafont` R package is installed, and that
    `extrafont::loadfonts()` can load those fonts. Confirm that the
    fonts have been loaded by calling `extrafont::fonts()` in R.

``` r
extrafont::fonts()
```

-   Create a simple ‘R script’ (not ‘R Markdown’ or ‘R Notebook’)
    containing the following calls:

    -   Call `get_styles() -> styles` to get a customizable styles list.
    -   Call `set_apa_defaults()` to set APA themes as the defaults for
        flextables and ggplots.
    -   Call `init_tfas()` to initialize/reset the list of table,
        figure, and appendix content.
    -   Call `add_styling(styles, df) -> styles` to add automatic
        styling for column names and values in a data frame based on the
        class of the column (factor, logical, numeric, string) or
        directly manipulate the styles list to adjust styling as needed.
    -   Call `tibble(...) %>% flextable() %>% styler(styles)` to create
        an APA styled flextable. Numeric columns will be center-aligned
        and decimal aligned by default. The `styles` list will control
        other styling options. The styling can also be touched-up using
        `flextable` functions if needed.
    -   Short-cuts are available to create specially formatted analysis
        result tables. For example: `aov(...) %>%   as_flextable_aov()`.
    -   Call
        `add_table(x, bookmark, title, styles, notes = NULL,   wide = FALSE, ...)`
        to add an APA styled flextable, `x`, as a bookmarked table with
        the given `title`, `styles`, and `notes`. If the table is wide,
        use `wide = TRUE` to display that table in landscape
        orientation. There are functions available to assist with
        preparing the title and notes args. The `bookmark` string must
        start with “t” (for table) and be less than 40 characters long.
    -   Call `add_figure(fig, bookmark, title, styles, ...)` to add a
        ggplot as a bookmarked figure with the given `title`, `styles`,
        and `notes`. If the figure is wide, use `wide = TRUE` to display
        that figure in landscape orientation. The `bookmark` string must
        start with “f” (for figure) and be less than 40 characters long.
    -   Call `add_appendix(bookmark, fun, wide = FALSE)` to add a
        bookmarked appendix. The bookmark string must start with “a”
        (for appendix) and be less than 40 characters long. The `fun`
        function must accept an rdocx object and use commands from the
        `officer` package to add appendix content and return the updated
        rdocx object. Within the `fun` function, you may find the
        following helpful:
        -   Call `add_md()` to add normal paragraphs to the appendix
            with markdown styling support (based on the default
            paragraph style).
        -   Call `add_code_file()` to add the contents of a source-code
            file to the appendix (in Courier New, 10pt, single-spaced).
    -   Call `apa_docx("input_file.docx", "output_file.docx")` which
        will read the bookmark references from the input docx file and
        generate the output docx file with the referenced tables,
        figures, and appendices arranged in the right order.
        -   As a short-hand notation, calling
            `apa_docx(here = function() {})` from within an R script
            named `paper.R` will automatically use `paper.docx` as the
            input file and `paper.tfa.docx` as the output file.
        -   A convenient approach is to create an R project per paper
            and name the input files `paper.docx` and `paper.R` and the
            output file will be `paper.tfa.docx`, which you will include
            into `paper.docx`.
        -   If you follow those conventions, then you can also use a
            relative path name in the `IncludeText` field as follows:
            `{ IncludeText "{ FileName \p }/../paper.tfa.docx" }`. Use
            `Ctrl-F9` to insert the outer and inner braces (don’t type
            them directly since they are special), and type the rest
            verbatim.

-   Once the output file has been generated, open the input docx file,
    and if the `IncludeText` field does not auto-update then press
    `Ctrl-A` (to select all) once and press `F9` (to update all fields)
    twice.

-   Use `Word > Insert > Cross Reference` to insert or remove references
    to bookmarks defined in the included file. Regenerate the output
    docx file after adding, removing, or re-ording bookmark references.

The documentation for the functions can be opened with the command
`help(package = "apatfa")`.

To learn more about `apatfa`, start with the vignettes (coming soon):
`browseVignettes(package = "apatfa")`.
